Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and
today we are talking about
something a little different.
Today we’ll take a look at six of the
most unusual street names in London.
Some of them are steeped in history,
while others make absolutely no
sense at all or have more than one
supposed origin, or explanation.
There are literary connections,
murder mysteries and legends.
And in fact, for good measure, we’re
going to include a couple more from
outside the M25, from further afield,
outside London, because there is
indeed life outside the capital.
OK then, let’s get into it and talk
about some of the most unusual street
names in London, and indeed in Britain.
Now, before we start, it’s worth spending
just a minute thinking about, reminding
ourselves perhaps, about how streets
get their names in the first place.
Typically they’re named after
places, after kings and queens or
people of historical importance.
Avenue Victor Hugo, Potsdamer
Platz, Via Dante, Beijing Lu.
And the UK is no exception.
Most streets are named after
places, attractions, or people.
And to illustrate this in statistical
terms, the most popular street names
in the UK are, in this order, High
Street, Station Road, Main Street,
Park Road, and then Church Road.
And it goes on - Oxford Road,
London Road, Hill Road, King’s
Street, you get the picture.
None of these street names have
particularly interesting stories,
but there are plenty of streets that
do, and many of them can be found
within a very small area of London.
So, without further ado, the first
unusual street name on our list is
Frying Pan Alley, in London’s East End.
Frying Pan Alley is actually in a narrow
alleyway in Spitalfields, an area of
east London known for its famous market.
And an alleyway is a narrow
street or passage that runs
between or behind buildings.
So, how did Frying Pan Alley get its name?
Well, you can probably guess part of it.
It's thought to come from ironmongers
that used to have shops in the alley
and would hang their frying pans
in the window or above the door
to attract potential customers.
On a quick language note, an ironmonger
is someone who sells housing and gardening
equipment, usually made from metal.
And originally it meant someone
who sells things made of iron.
And if you find any word in English
that ends in “monger”, it means
someone who sells that thing - a
fishmonger sells fish, for example.
And it can even be used metaphorically,
for ideas, for example - a scaremonger
is someone who sells, or spreads,
scary stories, and a hatemonger is
someone who spreads hate, especially
towards one group of people.
But we’re getting distracted, let
me get back to Frying Pan Alley,
because there is more to it.
The legend goes that one of these frying
pan signs fell on someone walking down the
alley, and shoppers then started walking
on the other side of the street, causing
the locals to call it Frying Pan Alley.
Nowadays Frying Pan Alley is
surrounded by modernist, glass
fronted buildings and businesses,
it’s in a really fancy area of London.
But this is a relatively
modern phenomenon.
Even in the early 20th century it was
in one of the poorest areas of the city.
You can actually read about this
specific street in the works of the
famous American writer Jack London.
He wrote a book called “The People of
the Abyss”, which described the squalid,
dirty or filthy, East End of London
that he saw when he visited in 1902.
In it, he described, and I’m
quoting directly, “we cut off
to the left into Spitalfields,
and dived into Frying Pan Alley.
A swarm of children cluttered
the slimy pavement, for all the
world like tadpoles just turned
frogs on the bottom of a dry pond.
In a narrow doorway… sat a woman
with a young babe, nursing at her
breasts grossly naked and libelling
all the sacredness of motherhood.”
If you go there today you’ll see
lawyers and bankers, but, as you just
heard, not much more than 100 years
ago it was a very different place.
Now, next on our list of unusual street
names is Wardrobe Place, down in the
City of London, London’s financial
district, close to the Tower of London.
A wardrobe, I’m sure you know, is the
place where you keep your clothes,
and it’s normally kept in the bedroom.
So, why would a street be
called “Wardrobe Place”?
Who kept their wardrobe outside, or who
had a wardrobe so large and important that
an entire street would be named after it?
Well, the owner of the wardrobe in
question was King Edward I of England,
who ruled in the 13th century.
And “wardrobe”, when referring to a
king or queen, was something slightly
more grand than a simple IKEA cupboard
that you or I might keep our clothes in.
Technically speaking it wasn’t literally
a wardrobe but rather the ‘King’s
Wardrobe’, as it was known, or if
we translate it into plain English,
we could say “all the King’s stuff”.
The King’s Wardrobe is thought to have
contained something called the ‘Privy
Wardrobe’, which kept armour and weapons
made at the Tower of London, and the
Great Wardrobe, which was where they
kept King Edward’s clothes and jewellery.
But in time it also became the home of
coins and other valuables, important
royal documents, fur, as well as
other valuable things like spices.
And as with Frying Pan Alley, there’s
also a literary connection here.
William Shakespeare, who lived close
to the King’s Wardrobe sometime around
the turn of the 16th century, described
his property in his will as “being in
Blackfriers in London, nere the Wardrobe.”
If you were reading this and thinking
“near the Wardrobe”?, well, this street
was so well known that people simply
referred to it as “the wardrobe”.
So, can you go and see
this wardrobe today?
Unfortunately not.
The King’s Wardrobe burnt down in the
Great Fire of London in 1666, but you can
certainly visit the street and feel smug
about knowing where it got its name from.
For our next street we only have to walk
10 minutes north from Wardrobe Place,
to the strangely named Turnagain Lane.
And indeed, walking, getting
from one point to another, is
going to play an important role
in the story of Turnagain lane.
Another important point to mention in
this story is about a London river.
And I’m not talking about the
River Thames, the big river that
runs from west to east, that cuts
across the belly of the city.
I’m talking about a river
called the River Fleet.
It doesn’t exist any more, but it
used to run down Farringdon Street and
join the Thames at Blackfriars Bridge.
Crucially, there was no bridge to
cross the Fleet in this part of
Farringdon, so if you were walking
down Turnagain Lane you’d have to ‘turn
again’ and find a different route - it
was, in other words, a dead end,
and the street name an instruction.
And though the river went dry
in the 18th century, the name
stuck and remains to this day.
In fact, it you go to Turnagain Lane today
you’ll find some slightly unattractive
garages, so the instructions in the
street name are just as valid as
they were several hundred years ago.
Now, the next on our list
is a little more dramatic.
It’s called Knightrider
Street, and is just around the
corner from Wardrobe Place.
It’s Knight with a K, knight, a
soldier in The Middle Ages, rather
than night, the opposite of day.
Knightrider Street allegedly got its
name because it was the road that knights
would travel down in mediaeval London
to get to their jousting competitions.
Jousting, in case this word is unfamiliar,
was a form of duelling, or fighting,
done by people on horseback with long
lances, long poles, in the mediaeval era.
And if you are more familiar with American
pop culture than you are with mediaeval
jousting, which would be understandable,
you might remember that Knight Rider
was also the name of a popular 1980s
TV drama starring David Hasselhoff.
There is a signed picture of David
Hasselhoff in a pub on Knightrider street,
but unfortunately the name of this street
predates him by, well, almost 700 years,
with its first recorded use being in 1322.
Penultimate on our London list is Hanging
Sword Alley, close to London’s famous
Fleet Street, the place where all the
big newspapers were traditionally based.
Hanging Sword Alley allegedly dates
back to the 16th century, if not
before, but historians seem to think
that it was first called Hanging Sword
Alley in 1564 because of a sign for a
fencing school that hung in the street.
Fencing, by the way, is the sport where
people fight with thin swords, which
you might have seen in the Olympics.
Interestingly, Hanging Sword Alley
also had another name for a while
in the 18th century when it became
known as ‘Blood Bowl Alley’ after a
well-known disreputable local pub called
Blood Bowl House where a prostitute
was caught trying to rob a client.
And once again, this unusual street
name also has a literary connection,
appearing in Charles Dickens' A
Tale of Two Cities and Bleak House.
Finally, the last unusual street
name on our London list, Bleeding
Heart Yard, has two explanations, or
origins, and two literary connections.
The first, and perhaps the most believable
story, but I'll let you be the judge, is
that it took its name from a 16th century
inn, a pub, called The Bleeding Heart.
According to this story, the inn’s
sign had a picture of the Virgin Mary’s
heart being stabbed by several swords.
This one seems logical, and is
the type of thing that streets
are typically named after.
The other, slightly less believable
but more exciting story, is that
on a night in January of 1646 a
bloody murder occurred in the yard.
According to the story, which is more
of an urban legend at this point, there
was a ball, a party, that was taking
place that night, and a strange man
with a clawed hand appeared as a guest.
He spent the night, the story goes,
dancing with and charming a woman
named Lady Hatton, a figure from
England’s 17th century aristocracy.
The only problem?
Well, the morning after the party her
bloodied body was found ripped apart in
what is now known as Bleeding Heart Yard.
Her heart, so the legend goes, was
apparently found lying on the ground,
still working and pumping out blood.
Unlikely, perhaps, but it’s
certainly a good story.
And Bleeding Heart Yard also has
a literary connection, and again
it's the novelist most associated
with London, Charles Dickens.
In his novel Little Dorrit, Bleeding Heart
Yard is the home of the Plornish family.
But Bleeding Heart Yard’s literary
connections go even further back than
Dickens, first appearing in a collection
of poems and stories published in
1837 known as the Ingoldsby Legends.
In one of the stories, a woman
- presumably Lady Hatton - makes a deal
with the devil to become very wealthy,
and during the housewarming of her new
mansion, the party to celebrate her new
home, the devil arrives, dances with
her, and then rips out her heart and
throws it into Bleeding Heart Yard,
where’s it’s found still squirting out
blood the next morning - hence the name.
Well, however it got its name,
Bleeding Heart Yard - and the
name - remains to this day.
So, there are six weird and wonderful
street names from London, but I would
be doing an injustice to the rest of the
country if I didn’t at least mention a
few more, as there are some wonderful
stories of street names from elsewhere.
So, without further ado, let me tell
you the story of a street with an
unusual name because, well, it’s
called “The Street with No Name”.
That’s actually it’s name, “The
Street With No Name”, and it’s in
the village of Teignmouth in Devon,
to the south west of England.
And the story of how it got its
name, or how it didn’t get its name,
perhaps, is somewhat of a sad one.
The Street With No Name isn’t really
a street, per se, it’s more like an
alleyway between two larger streets.
And it’s somewhat of an accidental street,
it’s really just a gap between two rows of
houses, but was considered large enough to
be given a name, although not a real name.
So, it’s a bit of a sad story
if you ask me, but it's an
interesting one nevertheless.
And our final one is the bizarrely
named Warning Tongue Lane in
Doncaster, which is in South
Yorkshire in the north of England.
The legend goes that there’s somewhat
of a spooky story to this lane,
which runs through Doncaster and a
woodland area, which was itself once
known as Wailing Wood by locals.
Wailing, in case you weren’t aware, is
another way of saying screaming or crying,
usually from pain or anger or fear.
Anyway, Wailing Wood got its name,
apparently, from an old story about a
carriage which crashed in some fog on
Warning Tongue Lane many years ago.
A woman, so the story goes, died in the
crash and is now thought to haunt the
woods on foggy nights and warn people
from driving down the lane, so they
don’t meet the same fate as she did.
And Warning Tongue Lane, you might have
guessed, comes from her wailing warning
that can be heard on misty nights.
Spooky stuff indeed.
So, there you go, six of the most
unusual street names in London, and
a couple more from further afield.
All of these streets still exist
today, and the London ones are
actually surprisingly close together.
I plotted them all on Google Maps,
and it would only take 59 minutes
for you to visit all six of them.
So, if you are planning to a
visit to London, and you want a
challenge that you can do in under
an hour, go and give it a go.
Go to Knightrider Street and Bleeding
Heart Yard, stop and watch the
office workers dashing around from
meeting to meeting, and you can
feel smug and proud that you know,
in all probability, a lot more than
them about the weird and wonderful
stories behind these street names.
Ok then, that is it for today’s
episode on unusual street names
in London, with a couple of bonus
ones from the rest of the country.
It almost goes without saying that
these are only a small, tiny selection,
but an interesting one nonetheless.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Had you heard the stories of
any of these streets before?
What about strange street
names in your own country?
What’s the most unusual
street you’ve ever lived on?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.